Introduction to Data Structures Lecture (#649)
Ada-Developers-Academy/textbook-curriculum: 04-cs-fundamentals/classroom/intro-to-data-structures.md

</details>

<!-- Images from Wikipedia -->

Some example tree structures include:

- Organization charts
- Directory structures (files & folders in the operating system)

### Binary Search Trees

A binary search tree is a special type of tree where each element to the left of it's parent is less than the value of the parent, and the element to the right is greater than it's parent.  We will discuss Binary Search Trees in the internship portion of Ada.  So the left subtree of a node contains elements less than the node's value, and the right subtree contain nodes with elements greater than the node's value.

![Binary Search Tree Example](images/bst.png)

### Heaps

A heap is another variation on a binary tree.  In a heap, the tree is all level full, each node has 2 children, except the bottommost level.  So the tree is called almost complete because it maximizes the number of nodes in each level.  Only the second-to-last level can have less than 2 children.  Further in a max-heap each child is less than it's parent.  So the largest value is the root of the tree.  Similarly a min-heap is an almost-complete tree where each node is smaller than it's children.  

> We will discuss heaps further in the internship period at Ada.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will discuss heaps further in the internship portion of Ada.
```

Some data structures could be _implemented using other data strucutres_. For example, a **stack** or a **queue**, can both be implemented using either an array or a linked list. In other words, behind the scenes, a stack or a queue is implemented simply as an array or a linked list with further restrictions added.

## Summary

We have looked, at a high-level, at a variety of data structures which we will examine in the course of CS Fundamentals.  When selecting a data structure consider what operations you will need to do with the data.  Then look at the cost for each operation with possible data structures and use the resulting values to evaluate your options.

![Big O Cheatsheet](images/big-o-cheatsheet-image.png)

<!-- Big o Chetsheet image -->

## Terms

| Term | Definition |
|--- |--- |

> | Data Structure | A method of organizing, and managing information which enables efficient access and modification |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Data Structure | A method of organizing, and managing information which enables efficient access and modification. |
```

> | Abstract Data Structure | A data structure described by the operations it can perform, not from a specific implementation |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Abstract Data Structure | A data structure described by the operations it can perform, not from a specific implementation. |
```

| Tree | A data structure which is a collection of nodes (starting at a root node), where each node is a data structure consisting of a value, together with a list of references to nodes (the "children"), with the constraints that no reference is duplicated, and none points directly or indirectly back to itself or a parent. |
| Binary Search Tree | A type of tree in which each node has a maximum of two children (thus binary) and for each node any children on the left subtree are less than the current node and each node on the right subtree has a value greater than the current node. |
| Heap | A binary tree data structure where each subtree either has the root larger than the children (max-heap) or smaller than the children (min-heap). |

## Resources

- [Basecs on Data Structures](https://medium.com/basecs/tagged/data-structures)
- [MIT Open Courseware Intro to Algorithms](https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-computer-science/6-006-introduction-to-algorithms-fall-2011/)
- [Former slides used in this course](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/11Xxhv2y1SJ-oBzrmzPuosB69MLxI2g23SA_eEgPIbws/edit#slide=id.p1)

> - [Wikipedia on Trees](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tree_(data_structure))

Reviewer: Do we want to add Wikipedia links for other data structures mentioned?

```suggestion
- [Wikipedia on Arrays](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Array_data_structure)
- [Wikipedia on Linked Lists](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linked_list)
- [Wikipedia on Stacks](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stack_(abstract_data_type))
- [Wikipedia on Queues](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Queue_(abstract_data_type))
- [Wikipedia on Graphs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Graph_(abstract_data_type))
- [Wikipedia on Trees](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tree_(data_structure))
```
